Add blog post about blob store design challenges (#305)
n0-computer/iroh.computer: src/app/blog/blob-store-design-challenges/page.mdx

  draft: false,
  author: 'Rüdiger Klaehn',
  date: '2025-02-24',
  title: 'Blob store design challenges',
  description:
    "It's just hashed data, what's so complex about a blob store anyway?",
}

export const metadata = {
  title: post.title,
  description: post.description,
}

export default (props) => <BlogPostLayout article={post} {...props} />

We've been hard at work with one of our protocols that you can pick off the shelf with iroh: [iroh-blobs]
You might've used iroh-blobs before if you tried out [`sendme`](https://www.iroh.computer/sendme), which is just a small CLI wrapper over iroh with iroh-blobs.

Put briefly, iroh-blobs helps transfer arbitrary data ("blobs") from one device to another via iroh in a way that allows these transfers to be interrupted, resumed and verified by content-addressing blobs using the BLAKE3 hashing function.

Iroh-blobs also allows you to exchange the backing storage it uses via *blob store* abstraction, so the actual hashes and blobs might be stored as files on disk, stored fully in-memory or even fully remote by utilizing some cloud storage.

Now, BLAKE3 hashed data and BLAKE3 verified streaming/bao are fully deterministic.

> The iroh blobs protocol is implemented in this spirit. Even for complex requests like requests that involve multiple ranges or entire hash sequences, for every request, there is exactly one sequence of bytes that is the correct answer. And the requester will notice if *data* is incorrect after at most 16 KiB of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The iroh blobs protocol is implemented in this spirit. Even for complex requests that involve multiple ranges or entire hash sequences, there is exactly one sequence of bytes that is the correct answer. And the requester will notice if *data* is incorrect after at most 16 KiB of data.
```

I *think* this doesn't change the meaning of the sentence, so is still correct. But another read doesn't hurt.

Author: I want to emphasize that the fn from request to correct answer is fully deterministic (modulo limited ability to lie about sizes under certain circumstances), so I think keeping the `for every request`.

So why is designing a blob store for BLAKE3 hashed data so complex? What are the challenges?

## Terminology

The job of a blob store is to store two pieces of data per BLAKE3 `hash`, the actual data itself and an `outboard` containing the flattened hash tree that connects each `chunk` of data to the root hash. Data and outboard are kept separate so that the data can be used as-is.

While the [bao] crate stores tree hashes all the way down to &le; 1024 byte BLAKE3 `chunks`, we store the outboard only down to 16 KiB `chunk groups` to reduce the outboard size. 

## In memory store

> In the simplest case, you store data in memory. If you want to serve complete blobs, you just need a map from `hash` to `data` and `outboard` stored in a cheaply cloneable container like [bytes::Bytes]. Even if you want to also handle incomplete blobs, you use a map from `hash` and `chunk number` to (&le; 1024 byte) data block, and that's it. Such a store is relatively easy to implement using a crate like [bao-tree] and a simple [BTreeMap] wrapped in a [Mutex].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the simplest case, you store data in memory. If you want to serve complete blobs, you just need a map from `hash` to `data` and `outboard` stored in a cheaply cloneable container like [`bytes::Bytes`]. Even if you want to also handle incomplete blobs, you use a map from `hash` and `chunk number` to (&le; 1024 byte) data block, and that's it. Such a store is relatively easy to implement using a crate like [bao-tree] and a simple [`BTreeMap`] wrapped in a [`Mutex`].
```

Author: Yeah, I don't like it. For me it is putting styling information into markdown, and I think the cost benefit ratio for blog posts where you should be able to write them quickly is not there. But... 🤷‍♂️ ...

## Syncing remote blobs by hash

If we sync data from a remote node, we do know the hash but don't have the data. In case the blob is small, we can request and atomically write the data, so we have a similar situation as above. But as soon as the data is larger than a chunk group size (16 KiB), we will have a situation where the data has to be written incrementally. This is much more complex than adding local files. We now have to keep track of which chunks of the blob we have locally, and which chunks of the blob we can *prove* to have locally (not the same thing if you have a chunk group size > 1).

## Using the data

As soon as data is added, we can serve it over the network or use it locally. We don't have to wait for completion for this. We can start sharing a large blob even before we are finished downloading it.

When a range request comes in that contains ranges that are not yet present locally, we will notice that the local data is incomplete and stop answering the request - outgoing data is always validated.

Alternatively we can rely on a bitfield to make sure that all requested data is present locally.

## Blob deletion

> On creation, blobs are tagged with a temporary tag that prevents them from being deleted for as long as the process lives. They can then be tagged with a persistent tag that prevents them from being deleted even after a restart. And last but not least, large groups of blobs can be protected from deletion in bulk by putting a sequence of hashes into a blob and tagging that blob as a hash sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On creation, blobs are tagged with a temporary tag that prevents them from being deleted for as long as the process lives. They can then be tagged with a persistent tag that extends their persistence beyond restarts. And last but not least, large groups of blobs can be protected from deletion in bulk by putting a sequence of hashes into a blob and tagging that blob as a hash sequence.
```

Author: "prevents them from being deleted even after a restart" explains what is meant by persistence. So I like the previous version better.

import { BlogPostLayout } from '@/components/BlogPostLayout'
import {ThemeImage} from '@/components/ThemeImage'

export const post = {
  draft: false,
  author: 'Rüdiger Klaehn',

>   date: '2025-02-24',

Reviewer: Need to remember to adjust the date

  title: 'Blob store design challenges',
  description:
    "It's just hashed data, what's so complex about a blob store anyway?",
}

export const metadata = {
  title: post.title,
  description: post.description,
}

export default (props) => <BlogPostLayout article={post} {...props} />

> We've been hard at work with one of our protocols that you can pick off the shelf with iroh: [iroh-blobs].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've been hard at work with one of our protocols that you can pick up off the shelf with `iroh`: [iroh-blobs].
```

> You might've used it before if you tried out [`sendme`](https://www.iroh.computer/sendme), which is just a small CLI wrapper over iroh with iroh-blobs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might've used it before if you tried out [`sendme`](https://www.iroh.computer/sendme), which is just a small CLI wrapper over `iroh` with `iroh-blobs`.
```

> Put briefly, this protocol helps you transfer arbitrary data ("blobs") from one device to another in a way that allows these transfers to be interrupted, resumed and verified by content-addressing blobs using the BLAKE3 hashing function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Put briefly, this protocol helps you transfer arbitrary data ("blobs") from one device to another in a way that allows these transfers to be interrupted, resumed, and verified by content-addressing blobs using the BLAKE3 hashing function.
```

> It also allows you to exchange the backing storage it uses via a *blob store* abstraction. The actual hashes and blobs might be stored as files on disk, stored fully in-memory or even fully remotely by utilizing some cloud storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also allows you to exchange the backing storage it uses via a *blob store* abstraction. The actual hashes and blobs might be stored as files on disk, stored fully in-memory, or even fully remotely by utilizing some cloud storage.
```

> Now, BLAKE3 hashed data and BLAKE3 verified streaming/bao are fully deterministic.
> 
> The iroh blobs protocol is implemented in this spirit. Even for complex requests like requests that involve multiple ranges or entire hash sequences, for every request, there is exactly one sequence of bytes that is the correct answer. And the requester will notice if *data* is incorrect after at most 16 KiB of data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
BLAKE3 hashed data and BLAKE3 verified streaming/bao are fully deterministic and the `iroh-blobs` protocol is implemented in this spirit.

Even for complex requests like requests that involve multiple ranges or entire hash sequences, for every request, there is exactly one sequence of bytes that is the correct answer. And the requester will notice if *data* is incorrect after at most 16 KiB of data.
```

So why is designing a blob store for BLAKE3 hashed data so complex? What are the challenges?

## Terminology

The job of a blob store is to store two pieces of data per BLAKE3 `hash`, the actual data itself and an `outboard` containing the flattened hash tree that connects each `chunk` of data to the root hash. Data and outboard are kept separate so that the data can be used as-is.

While the [bao] crate stores tree hashes all the way down to &le; 1024 byte BLAKE3 `chunks`, we store the outboard only down to 16 KiB `chunk groups` to reduce the outboard size. 

## In memory store

In the simplest case, you store data in memory. If you want to serve complete blobs, you just need a map from `hash` to `data` and `outboard` stored in a cheaply cloneable container like [bytes::Bytes]. Even if you want to also handle incomplete blobs, you use a map from `hash` and `chunk number` to (&le; 1024 byte) data block, and that's it. Such a store is relatively easy to implement using a crate like [bao-tree] and a simple [BTreeMap] wrapped in a [Mutex].

> But the whole point of a blob store - in particular for iroh-blobs, where we don't have an upper size limit for blobs - is to store *a lot* of data persistently. So while an in memory store implementation is included in iroh-blobs, an in memory store won't do for all use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But the whole point of a blob store - in particular for `iroh-blobs`, where we don't have an upper size limit for blobs - is to store *a lot* of data persistently. So while an in memory store implementation is included in `iroh-blobs`, an in memory store won't do for all use cases.
```

## Ok, fine. Let's use a database

We want a database that works on the various platforms we support for iroh, and that does not come with a giant dependency tree or non-rust dependencies. So our current choice is an embedded database called [redb]. But as we will see the exact choice of database does not matter that much.

A naive implementation of a block store using a relational or key value database would just duplicate the above approach. A map from hash and chunk number to a &le; 1024 byte data block, except now in a persistent table.

But this approach has multiple problems. While it would work very well for small blobs, it would be very slow for large blobs. First of all, the database will have significant storage overhead for each chunk. Second, operating systems are very efficient in quickly accessing large files. Whenever you do disk IO on a computer, you will always go through the file system. So anything you add on top will only slow things down.

> E.g. playing back videos from this database would be orders of magnitude slower than playing back from disk. And any interaction with the data would have to go through the iroh node, while with a file system we could directly use the file on disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
E.g. playing back videos from this database would be orders of magnitude slower than playing back from disk. And any interaction with the data would have to go through the `iroh` node, while with a file system we could directly use the file on disk.
```

## So, no database?

This is a perfectly valid approach when dealing exclusively with complete, large files. You just store the data file and the outboard file in the file system, using the hash as file name. But this approach has multiple downsides as well.

First of all, it is very inefficient if you deal with a large number of tiny blobs, like we frequently do when working with [iroh-docs] or [iroh-willow] documents. Just the file system metadata for a tiny file will vastly exceed the storage needed for the data itself.

Also, now we are very much dependent on the quirks of whatever file system our target operating system has. Many older file systems like [FAT32] or EXT2 are notoriously bad in handling directories with millions of files. And we can't just limit ourselves to e.g. linux servers with modern file systems, since we also want to support mobile platforms and windows PCs.

> And last but not least, creating the metadata for a file is very expensive compared to writing a few bytes. We would be limited to a pathetically low download speed when bulk downloading millions of blobs, like for example an iroh collection containing the linux source code. For very small files embedded databases are [frequently faster](https://www.sqlite.org/fasterthanfs.html) than the file system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And last but not least, creating the metadata for a file is very expensive compared to writing a few bytes. We would be limited to a pathetically low download speed when bulk downloading millions of blobs, like for example an `iroh` collection containing the linux source code. For very small files embedded databases are [frequently faster](https://www.sqlite.org/fasterthanfs.html) than the file system.
```

There are additional problems when dealing with large incomplete files. Enough to fill a book. More on that later.

## What about a hybrid approach

It seems that databases are good for small blobs, and the file system works great for large blobs. So what about a hybrid approach where small blobs are stored entirely inline in a database, but large blobs are stored as files in the file system? This is complex, but provides very good performance both for millions of small blobs and for a few giant blobs.

We won't ever have a directory with millions of files, since tiny files never make it to the file system in the first place. And we won't need to read giant files through the bottleneck of a database, so access to large files will be as fast and as concurrent as the hardware allows.

> This is exactly the approach that we currently take in the iroh-blobs file based store. For both data files and outboards, there is a configurable threshold below which the data will be stored inline in the database. The configuration can be useful for debugging and testing, e.g. you can force all data on disk by setting both thresholds to 0. But the defaults of 16 KiB for inline outboard and data size make a lot of sense and will rarely have to be changed in production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is exactly the approach that we currently take in the `iroh-blobs` file based store. For both data files and outboards, there is a configurable threshold below which the data will be stored inline in the database. The configuration can be useful for debugging and testing, e.g. you can force all data on disk by setting both thresholds to 0. But the defaults of 16 KiB for inline outboard and data size make a lot of sense and will rarely have to be changed in production.
```

# Blob store trade offs

Iroh is a library for building on direct connections between devices. It comes with a variety of custom protocols. One of the oldest and most general protocols is [iroh-blobs].

> Iroh-blobs provides a way to sync content-addressed data between devices. We use the [BLAKE3] hash function to identify data, and a modified version of BLAKE3 verified streaming to transfer data.

Reviewer 3: make this first mention of blake3 a link to the website/spec?

Reviewer 3: lol, you did, and I missed it
